---
title: "The Cutting Edge of Common Sense; why businesses fail to follow Google's example"
date: 2021-01-17T11:36:33+08:00
draft: false
featuredImg: ""
tags: 
  - Google
  - HR
  - Human Resources
  - Management
  - Paradigm
---




Google is namedropped when somebody wants to demonstrate success, innovation or an overwhelmingly positive work environment (*we’ll save toxic echo chamber algorithms for another day*).  The name of the company has become a buzzword for marrying financial success with employee satisfaction; [‘Googles strategy for happy employees boosts it’s bottom line’]( https://www.forbes.com/sites/pavelkrapivin/2018/09/17/how-googles-strategy-for-happy-employees-boosts-its-bottom-line/).  It shouldn’t be a surprise to anyone.  In an increasingly globalised world, many companies have good ideas, but the company with the best people is going to come out on top.  Google has mastered HR by not doing *HR*, a technique designed and propagated by the founders and the former Senior Vice President of People Operations, Laszlo Bock.

> *In 2015 Bock published **Work Rules!**, ‘a practical guide to help people find meaning in work and improve the way they live and lead’ – in essence what HR looks like in Google.  It’s an excellent read, and has offered far greater value than all the texts I was semi-forced to digest throughout my (work funded) Business Masters program.*

Business academics is *mostly* generated by people who have failed in business, academics or both.  This is why business textbooks read like a sentient calculator tried to make sense of basic human interaction.

Continuing this theme in obfuscation (because emotions are hard), bureaucratic HR processes are typically devised by a few sane(ish) Necromancers.  They are subsequently sold/taught/distributed by a dead eyed army of underpaid, sub-competent accountants, caught in an anguished parody of half-life.  Typically lacking in empathy and compassion, they masquerade as academics and professionals concerned with people, and presumably worship Spreadsheet macros from the windows 95 era.  

A cursory search of my nearest university for HR/Human Resources texts reveals 15,769 hits available in a combination of pdfs, online essays/articles and dusty books; some are brand new snake oil, others are cursed relics from the dawn of the .com bubble.  But there is not one mention of Laszlo Bock, who I argue is the Arbiter of effective HR practises, based purely on [the evidence]( https://www.marketwatch.com/story/google-parent-alphabet-joins-1-trillion-in-market-value-for-first-time-2020-01-16).  What Bock and the founders did was basic, but it’s anathema to the majority of businesses.  Because whilst simple, it is for some people impossibly hard, despite being one of the roots of Googles success:  discriminate properly and trust completely; select, assess the right people, and give them real autonomy.  

This adult approach to being a human adult enables: 


**Information transparency across the organisation**, which allows higher up Intent to be communicated effectively (everyone has a better grasp of the big picture and where their actions fit into it, and second order effects etc). 


**Output orientation vs ‘time served’ metrics**; trying to measure an individual’s effective output with regards to quality and quantity is impossible to do effectively on any meaningful level.  Trust your team to know when they need to work out, sleep, and work on their projects.  Some people need to sprint, and you cannot sprint all the time.


**Recognition of management as an entirely separate facilitative skillset**: **Flat hierarchy**.  People are valued on their merit/competence alone, and facilitators shouldn’t necessarily be paid more than the people they’re facilitating - or be more senior in the hierarchy.  By separating management from seniority as a separate vocational skill path, you get much more effective/actually effective managers, and much more successful teams.


On a basic level, what Google does right is discrimination.  Let’s be clear: everything the human brain does is a decision, every decision entails discrimination.  Physically discrimination is an essential component of reality.  Being aware of biases, implicit and otherwise, enables you to ensure that conscious and unconscious discrimination is tailored meritocratically and not biased illogically against people for arbitrary reasons.  If you don’t discriminate fairly and consistently, you end up with tyranny, and all the grimness that entails.  **The ability to create and sustain a meritocratic environment where employees are empowered to be autonomous because they are trusted implicitly, is what puts Google on the cutting edge of common sense.**

  
To do any of this you need an effective assessment department, and an effective employment offer.  The former in particular normally falls under HR, who are expected to be relatively impartial.  But to do this properly – to select the right candidate who the company can trust implicitly – requires two things: 1. A good enough person(s) to do the selecting (and ensure the process is good enough) and 2. An applicant who’s good enough, because the offer is generous enough.

The reality is that the reason HR as a profession has such an abysmal reputation everywhere except for within HR itself, is because being common sense police and change management consultants requires a large degree of trust, control and talent.  
Companies will often treat their HR departments literally, like *‘human resources’*.  Far from being the marshals of meritocracy, they end up as poorly paid bean counters who lack any real authority and focus more on ruthlessly enforcing asinine and outdate processes (which act as a convenient shield), in order to save the bottom line in the short term.  They end up as payroll, trying to ‘cuff’ all the important stuff that’s often far beyond their behavioural and cognitive intelligence, or even worse – if they are talented they end up in a form of intellectual **prison**.  They leave, or collapse into themselves, having been forced to keep a steady pay check due to misfortune, until they are saved - one way or another.

Are HR to blame? Yes.  Partly.  But they’re not the cause.  That’s the jailor, who has the most to lose in challenging this paradigm: Hierarchical Management.  Specifically, a management process that resembles a bastardisation of medieval aristocracy and arbitrary Soviet career advancement.  
Management itself is a completely separate vocation.  However, mediocre businesses promote people to management positions based either on their vocational (non-management related) experience, or the fact that they’ve done the job before.  This means managers are often less competent than the people they employ, and barriers are thrown up in the face of younger, far more gifted personnel with a penchant for people skills.  This process creates gerontocracies with meritocratic elements, where time served is spectacularly overvalued as a metric for advancement.

It’s hard to have a flat hierarchy when the person involved is not the best person for the job.  Because they’re a great engineer, but they have the interpersonal skills of a menacing Crow.

> Management like leadership is a buzzword; useless without extrapolating and defining in a specific context; if something means 1000 things it’s meaningless in any shared reality.  In this article, let’s define management as the capability to facilitate and guide personnel in completing their assigned tasks.  

This article just focuses on the pre-cursors for an open, transparent culture in which employees are empowered according to their ability, and not governed by an arbitrary record of seniority propped up by outdated metrics such as ‘time served’. We as a species are slavishly addicted to measuring what can easily be quantified vs what needs to be.  Comfort is the enemy; change is difficult and people often focus on short term pain, not the long term gain with respect to changing workplace culture.  

There’s an excellent moment in Bocks book where a Google HR employee attends a conference.  A VP from a rival company approaches her and excitedly exclaims that his organisation will soon be adopting Googles management and HR practices; they are getting a fun room for the employees to hand out in when they’re not working…  The Google exec points out that whilst this is a nice idea, they could try by first focusing on information transparency across the company so all employees feel attached and invested; at Google all meetings are recorded and available to be watched back through the org intranet.  “Oh no” the aghast VP says, they’d never go for that.  The point Bock makes is that all the fun obvious things associated with Google such as spaces to take a nap, are a 2nd order effect from what really matters – trust, empowerment transparency.   


Businesses are afraid to discriminate effectively, because they lack the tools to do so; a culture of trust that attracts talent, and a department talented enough to lead the assessment.  Instead they hide behind processes under the guise of ‘fairness’, whilst in reality outsourcing the risk of bias to policies that are asinine in practise and wholly unaccountable. 

Changing this requires addressing the cause: an outdated model of management correlated with seniority, that often results in an ineffective gerontocracy that attracts the new, the desperate and the mediocre.  Unfortunately, this cause is driven by it’s own hierarchy of needs to survive through protecting the status quo.  It requires a herculean effort of empowered change management or decades of evolving cultural trends to change this.  Until then, countless people will be frustrated with the unused bean bag playrooms and dead eyed corporate platitudes they’re forced to endure in lieu of meritocratic change.

Let’s not forget the corporate solution to a HR problem: spend a lot of money on overpriced HR consultants to point out the obvious to a HQ that can subsequently disregard the report.  Employees (who probably have some very good ideas) are further marginalised, the status quo is maintained, and the shareholders/ownership are happy.  Everyone (at HQ) wins.  

Trust > Autonomy > Increased Output > A Healthier Bottom Line (in terms of happiness *and* cash) 





