---
title: "The Cartoonisation of the Moral High Ground"
date: 2021-03-01T11:36:33+08:00
draft: false
featuredImg: ""
tags: 
  - BLM
  - Transgender
  - Trans
  - Women
  - Gender
---

Morality is a subjective thing.  It is fluid, and subject itself to definition given that it’s meaning can vary wildly.  Context is king.  Morality itself isn’t a complicated issue so much as one that requires hard work, nuance and patience to understand because it changes and evolves depending upon the stakes and the context, because it is at it’s root an opinion.  It’s far more satisfying to forgo this nuance, over simply an issue and simply rage; levying moral issues into righteous superiority.  This requires rigidity, fixed boundaries within which to shout and scream.

In the final two Avengers film (spoilers?), half the people in the universe die because the heroes refuse to sacrifice their integrity and kill one of their own.  They are ultimately vindicated. This 2 dimensional, fictional tale of morality is a common trope in mass cultural entertainment in the ego centric West, with it’s roots resting firmly in Athenian individualism and unregulated capital markets.  An uncompromising, unpragmatic and ultimately unhelpful approach to ethics is in effect a cartoonisation of the Moral High Ground, and obfuscates any process of compromise to drive change forwards at an achievable pace.  Hence we now live in the age of cancel culture.  

Trans people should not have to suffer for religious biggots sensibilities.  People should not be unfairly discriminated against because they happen to have a different skin colour.  As pernicious as these issues are however, the BLM and trans rights movements are being cynically exploited to forgo real change in our society.  Whilst I’m not arguing that these causes aren’t vital, and require championing, they should also be put in perspective; 51% of the human race are systematically discriminated against and we need to re-appraise our focus to account for ethical issues that dwarf the minority of colour racist idiots and sexually insecure lunatics who account for the bigotry of certain minority’s – however overtly monstrous this seems by comparison.

The fact is, addressing caregiver/gender equality will require addressing individual value and rights that will fundamentally evolve our society and drive positive change for all minority groups.  But that requires the status quo to change, and with it a public and private sector seemingly enslaved to asinine short termism.
Companies, Governments and 3rd sector organisations are exploiting popularist liberty movements to avoid addressing the most serious fault line in Western societies; gender equality and the re-distribution of care giver equity (ensuring that society is structured to minimise career disruption and thus discrimination due to caregiving). Instead, they address the cartoonish ‘colour racism’ endemic in America, but far less commonplace in other parts of the West compared with cultural xenophobia.  

Trans rights are another example of a smaller issue taking precedence over fundamental societal change.  [‘0.6% of adults’]( https://williamsinstitute.law.ucla.edu/publications/trans-adults-united-states/) in the US identify as transgender. Whilst the heartless discrimination of these people is abhorrent, it’s an economically expedient issue to deal with.  Kick starting an initiative in a white collar Western organisation aimed at tackling colour racism (the idiots flavour of discrimination) or transgender rights is cheap and easy.  For very little investment or change, the organisation manages to achieve the conjurer’s trick of appearing to be an equality champion, whilst avoiding doing any hard work to address the gender equality and caregiver equity.  There will always be a luckless Gary in accounting who’s an undiagnosed member of the Autistic Spectrum and falls foul of overt discrimination.  The subsequent witch hunt and re-education campaign is irrefutable proof of the organisations ‘goodness’, and staves off the need to deal with the fact that half the company’s workforce is under paid, under valued and not fairly supported. 

To put the 0.6% statistic into scale, [2.16% of adults]( https://www.mencap.org.uk/learning-disability-explained/research-and-statistics/how-common-learning-disability) in the UK have a learning disability which severely impacts their capacity to operate within society.  
Advocating for transgender rights is important, but the fact is that this is a minority issue that easily inspires debate, and has been cynically used by corporate algorithms to railroad the largest equality/equity issue of our civilisation.  Ultimately women, accounting for 51% of humans, lose out and take a back step to more overtly scary moral concerns whose value is distorted through the magnifying lens of social media.

A piece of depressing evidence showing how women are suffering as a result of popularist fringe issues that are exciting to fired up about, is the cancel culture-esque approach to removing gender pronouns from maternity wards in [the city of Brighton UK]( https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-sussex-56007728).  If we apply this to the world and assume an even split in the 0.6% figure along gender lines (disclosure: I have no evidence for an even split), that means 50.7% of the human population are no longer entitled to be recognised as having ‘different’ needs, because biologically *they can grow a human*.  This is madness. Women are cognitively identical but biologically different from men, and make up 51% percent of the population (based on chromosomes/birth gender).  They should be treated fairly by society compared with male and non-binary genders, given that we need them to have a species.  The fact is they have to be pregnant, give birth, and ideally breast feed (if able).  Non genetic females do not.

Individuals, regardless of gender, should be protected in their careers from the negative impact of caregiving.  We should all suck it up to pay the price this will entail.  It’s about the individual, but if a group ends up being discriminated against, it doesn’t matter whether it’s incidental or deliberate. Saving the feelings of 0.6% of the population to belittle the suffering of 51% is Marvel esque absurdism that wouldn’t be out of place in a Kafka work.  

The free market algorithm certainly wont address this.  There’s no quick buck to me made here. Governments need to step.

**And how should they address this is in the immediate term?  - Take a page out of Norway’s book; publish (publicly) the annual income and tax paid for every individual earning above a certain threshold in the respective country.  The cult of the free market can’t stand up to the gravity of the mass dissent that will follow.  This would even help mitigate legal tax cheating, with the public vilification of celebrities and entrepreneurs who use the tools our governments have given them.**  

Value itself must be valued.  In the long term with respect to defining value, academics prophesise the coming Anarchy of the robot revolution.  I’m sceptical.  Robots are expensive and serviceable, poor humans are cheap and forgettable.  The asinine cult of the unregulated market is leading to a pan-governmental squeeze on the middle class, which will lead to further impoverishment and a return to the age of inherited wealth; the new aristocracy.  This isn’t going to help the evolution of equity in any of our societies.  

Until we as species re-evaluate value itself, we will remain in a viral stage of our evolution.  Deistic belief structures remove the fear of apocalyptic consequences, whilst exacerbating the pressure to breed.   Popularist moral brinkmanship is every bit a cancer as irrational discrimination.
Shareholder interest isn’t magically going to do this for us.
This isn’t the 60’s, or even the 00’s.  The **Truth** will no longer get you laid, but a ruthless adherence to speaking truth to power is the only recourse against the cancellers and racists - fascists all.  We can either live in a cartoon whilst the 3 dimensional world around us burns, or we can put the twitter account down, let go of asinine righteous zeal, and do some hard work to address value in our society based on objective reality, not what’s expedient or easy.  Let’s start with transparency, and see how far the tide can take us.
